Drafting SL ref docs (#8709)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/dimension-properties.md

---
title: "Dimension properties"
id: dimension-properties
sidebar_label: "Dimension properties"
description: "Complete property reference for dbt Semantic Layer dimensions: time and categorical dimensions."
keywords:
  - dbt semantic layer
  - dimensions
  - dimension configuration
  - MetricFlow
---

Dimensions are non-aggregatable expressions that define how metrics can be grouped or sliced. They are always defined within a [semantic model](/reference/semantic-model-properties). See [Dimensions](/docs/build/dimensions) for concepts and examples.

## Available dimension properties

> | Property | Type | Required | Description |

Reviewer: The properties listed here are part of the legacy spec. I suggest we create a new table with the properties for the new spec and version block both tables.

Author: versioned in this [commit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8709/commits/b2b1062f74ba5cbbcb8fa7a3ec26cc75fda8b070)

|----------|------|----------|-------------|
| name | string | Yes | Unique within the semantic model. Displayed in downstream tools; can act as alias when `expr` differs. |
| type | string | Yes | `time` or `categorical`. |
| type_params | object | Yes (<Constant name="core" />) | For time dimensions: For example, `time_granularity`, `is_primary`, `time_partitioning_granularity`. Omitted for categorical. |
| description | string | No | Documentation for the dimension. |
| expr | string | No | Column or SQL expression. Defaults to the dimension name if omitted. |
| label | string | No | Display value in downstream tools. |
| meta | object | No | Metadata key-value pairs. |

> In dbt Core 2.0+, dimensions can be defined at the column level under a model's `columns` (with a `dimension` block per column) or as derived semantics. See [Dimensions](/docs/build/dimensions) for the full structure.

Reviewer: We don't have dbt core 2.0 yet. Also, the new spec is available on Latest and soon on dbt Core v1.12

> ## Full structure (standalone semantic model, pre-2.0)

Reviewer: Instead of indicating `(standalone semantic model, pre-2.0)`, I think we should add both samples (legacy and new spec) and version block them

Author: versioned in this [commit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8709/commits/b2b1062f74ba5cbbcb8fa7a3ec26cc75fda8b070)

keywords:
  - dbt semantic layer
  - dimensions
  - dimension configuration
  - MetricFlow
---

Dimensions are non-aggregatable expressions that define how metrics can be grouped or sliced. They are always defined within a [semantic model](/reference/semantic-model-properties). See [Dimensions](/docs/build/dimensions) for concepts and examples.

import LatestYamlSpecAvailability from '/snippets/_latest-yaml-spec-availability-versioned.md';

<LatestYamlSpecAvailability />

<VersionBlock firstVersion="1.12">

## Latest spec (model YAML)

Dimensions are defined at the column level.

### Available dimension properties (latest spec)

| Property / location | Type | Required | Description |
|---------------------|------|----------|-------------|
| `dimension:` (on column) | block | — | Block on a model column. |
| `dimension.type` | string | Yes | `time` or `categorical`. |
| `dimension.name` | string | No | Unique within the semantic model; defaults to column name. |
| `dimension.description` | string | No | Documentation for the dimension. |
| `dimension.label` | string | No | Display value in downstream tools. |
| `dimension.config` | object | No | Metadata and config. |

> | `granularity:` (on column) | string | Yes (time only) | Time grain, e.g. `day`, `week`, `month`. Required on the column for time dimensions. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `granularity:` (on column) | string | Yes (time only) | Time grain (for example, `day`, `week`, `month`). Required on the column for time dimensions. |
```

> | `derived_semantics.dimensions` | array | No | Derived dimensions with an `expr`. |

Reviewer 2: it feels a little weird to have this in a table of dimension properties - this is really a semantic model property I think.  It's not a property of a dimension.

`dimension:` above is similar.  maybe it's better to discuss these two separately from the rest of this table?  Then you can drop the `dimension.` from the rest of the fields, too.

Author: addressed in [this commit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8709/commits/e05f6ee13dbc050dfffbca4f0e370b61e6c59fc2)

> | `validity_params` (time) | object | No | SCD-style validity, e.g. `is_start`, `is_end`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `validity_params` (time) | object | No | SCD-style validity (for example, `is_start`, `is_end`). |
```

- **Column-level:** Under the model's `columns:` list, each column can have a `dimension:` block with *time* or *categorical* type, and optional `name`, `description`, `label`, `config`.
- **Time dimensions:** The column must also have a top-level `granularity:` (for example, `day`).
- **Derived dimensions:** Use optional `derived_semantics.dimensions` with an `expr`.
- **Validity (SCD):** Time dimensions can specify `validity_params` (for example, `is_start`, `is_end`).

For the full structure and examples, see [Dimensions](/docs/build/dimensions).

</VersionBlock>

<VersionBlock lastVersion="1.11">

## Legacy spec (standalone semantic model)

Dimensions are defined in a top-level `dimensions:` list on the semantic model.

### Available dimension properties (legacy spec)

| Property | Type | Required | Description |

> |----------|------|----------|-------------|

Reviewer 2: this chart is also missing the `is_partition` field

Author: addressed in [this commit](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/8709/commits/e05f6ee13dbc050dfffbca4f0e370b61e6c59fc2)

| name | string | Yes | Unique within the semantic model. Displayed in downstream tools; can act as alias when `expr` differs. |
| type | string | Yes | `time` or `categorical`. |

> | type_params | object | Yes (time only) | For time dimensions: e.g. `time_granularity`, `is_primary`, `time_partitioning_granularity`. Omitted for categorical. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| type_params | object | Yes (time only) | For time dimensions (for example, `time_granularity`, `is_primary`, `time_partitioning_granularity`). Omitted for categorical. |
```
